FR #982: Update Billed and Effective Cost Normative Requirements (#1966)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/datasets/cost_and_usage/columns/pricingcurrencyeffectivecost.md

# Pricing Currency Effective Cost

Pricing Currency Effective Cost represents the [Pricing Currency](#datasets.costandusage.pricingcurrency)-denominated equivalent of [Effective Cost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost). It reflects the cost of a [*charge*](#glossary:charge) based on the [*resources*](#glossary:resource) used, [*services*](#glossary:service) used, or [*contract commitments*](#glossary:contract-commitment) recognized in a given [*charge period*](#glossary:charge-period). Pricing Currency Effective Cost differs from Effective Cost only in denomination, not in the cost it represents.

> For all *charges*, Pricing Currency Effective Cost reflects all applicable pricing adjustments (e.g., reduced pricing from [*negotiated discounts*](#glossary:negotiated-discount) or [*commitment discounts*](#glossary:commitment-discount)). For usage *charges*, Pricing Currency Effective Cost includes the recognized portion of purchase *charges* applied to this *charge* (e.g., amortized portions of prepayments, drawdowns). For purchase *charges*, Pricing Currency Effective Cost excludes any amounts recognized in related usage *charges* (e.g., usage [*covered*](#glossary:covered-charge) by [*covering charges*](#glossary:covering-charge) such as *commitments*, pre-payments, or marketplace purchases which draw down based on usage), regardless of when those related *charges* are invoiced.

Reviewer: Should match effective cost description exactly with the exception of calling out it difference is the currency it is in.

Author: The PCEC preamble is intentionally shorter than the EffectiveCost preamble. Paragraph 2 ("Because Pricing Currency Effective Cost differs from Effective Cost only in denomination, it follows the same pricing adjustments, amortizations, and exclusions") plus the anchoring requirement on line 21 make PCEC = EffectiveCost in PricingCurrency. Duplicating the full covering/covered detail would create a maintenance burden with no additional clarity.

> Pricing Currency Effective Cost is denominated in the Pricing Currency. This allows the practitioner to perform a conversion from either 1) a [*national currency*](#glossary:national-currency) to a [*virtual currency*](#glossary:virtual-currency) (e.g., tokens to USD), or 2) one national currency to another (e.g., EUR to USD). Pricing Currency Effective Cost is commonly used to support FinOps activities, including [*accrual-based*](#glossary:accrual-based-accounting) reporting, forecasting, and cost allocation when pricing and billing use different currencies.

Reviewer 2: Wordsmithing to cut down on repetition throughout this preamble.  Feel free to tweak, but hopefully this shows where the duplications are.

```suggestion
Pricing Currency Effective Cost represents the [Pricing Currency](#datasets.costandusage.pricingcurrency)-denominated equivalent of [Effective Cost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost). It reflects the cost of a [*charge*](#glossary:charge) based on the [*resources*](#glossary:resource) used, [*services*](#glossary:service) used, or [*contract commitments*](#glossary:contract-commitment) recognized in a given [*charge period*](#glossary:charge-period). 

Because Pricing Currency Effective Cost differs from Effective Cost only in denomination, it inherently mirrors all applicable pricing adjustments, amortizations, and exclusions defined in standard Effective Cost. This metric provides practitioners with a standardized baseline, allowing them to view costs in a uniform currency -- whether transitioning from a [*virtual currency*](#glossary:virtual-currency) to a [*national currency*](#glossary:national-currency) (e.g., tokens to USD), or standardizing one national currency to another (e.g., EUR to USD). 

Pricing Currency Effective Cost is commonly used to support FinOps activities, including [*accrual-based*](#glossary:accrual-based-accounting) reporting, forecasting, and cost allocation when pricing and billing use different currencies.
```

Author: Partial take in fdb86b6. Cherry-picked the repetition fix ("Pricing Currency Effective Cost provides" → "This column provides") to bring the display name from 3x to 2x in paragraph 2.

Kept the rest of the current text for these reasons:
- "follows the same" is more concise than "inherently mirrors all applicable ... defined in standard Effective Cost." The phrase "standard Effective Cost" is unusual FOCUS phrasing and could read as implying a non-standard variant.
- "converting" is more precise than "transitioning" for currency operations.
- The double-dash before "whether" adds punctuation without adding clarity.

Used "This column" over "This metric" since column is the broader FOCUS term (metric is the column type).

* PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST be of type Decimal.
* PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.

> * PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.

Reviewer 3: Same here, this statement "PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value." has been removed from the specifications by PR #2047.

Author: Done, thanks! Resolving

* PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.
* PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.
* PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST be denominated in the [PricingCurrency](#datasets.costandusage.pricingcurrency).

> * PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST be the PricingCurrency-denominated equivalent of [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost).

Reviewer 2: @Matt-Cowsert @ijurica 
If we're going to add this here, I think we need to add the same language to `InvoiceDetail.PaymentCurrencyBilledCost`.

Are you open to that?  It would be:

> `* PaymentCurrencyBilledCost MUST be the PaymentCurrency-denominated equivalent of [BilledCost](#datasets.invoicedetail.paymentcurrencybilledcost).`

If so, please add it there.

Author: Agree in principle. The PaymentCurrencyBilledCost anchoring requirement should parallel the PCEC approach. Since InvoiceDetail.PaymentCurrencyBilledCost isn't in this PR's diff, I'll add it as a follow-up. @shawnalpay would you prefer it in this PR or coordinated with #1900?

Reviewer 2: @Matt-Cowsert 
Please do it here.  Thanks!

Author: Done in 031e8e8. Added both denomination and anchoring requirements to PaymentCurrencyBilledCost, paralleling the PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost pattern.

Note: your original comment had the link target pointing to `#datasets.invoicedetail.paymentcurrencybilledcost` (self-referential). Fixed to `#datasets.invoicedetail.billedcost` to match the PCEC pattern.

Covered/covering requirements are not repeated on PCBC — they're inherited transitively via the anchoring requirement, same as PCEC inherits EffectiveCost's rules.

Reviewer 2: Looks good, thank you!

> * PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST be the PricingCurrency-denominated equivalent of [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost). All normative requirements that apply to EffectiveCost apply equivalently to PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost when denominated in PricingCurrency.

Author: @ijurica -- one open question on the anchoring requirement (line 21): "All normative requirements that apply to EffectiveCost apply equivalently to PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost when denominated in PricingCurrency."

The EffectiveCost sum checks (effectivecost.md lines 26-27) reference BilledCost, which is BillingCurrency-denominated. There's no PricingCurrencyBilledCost to compare against. Does "apply equivalently" mean PCEC inherits those sum checks too? If so, what does the comparison target become?

Flagging for TF-3 discussion tomorrow. No action needed on your review pass -- just want it on your radar.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST be the PricingCurrency-denominated equivalent of [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost).
```

### I believe this is sufficient:
> * PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost MUST be the PricingCurrency-denominated equivalent of [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost).

- PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost being the PricingCurrency-denominated equivalent of EffectiveCost is a Dynamic Requirement - the intent is clear: derive the applicable exchange rate and use it to verify consistency between the two columns.
- Refining this into a Static Requirement is out of scope for this PR and can be addressed in a future release (we should add a FR to the backlog).

  A couple of notes:
  - The exchange rate can be implicitly resolved from existing column pairs: `ListUnitPrice` / `PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice` gives `ListExchangeRate`, and analogously `ContractedUnitPrice` / `PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice` gives `ContractedExchangeRate`.
  - When no negotiated contracted price exists, `ContractedExchangeRate` equals `ListExchangeRate`. When it does exist, `ContractedExchangeRate` is more favorable.
  - `ContractedExchangeRate` is the correct rate to apply when verifying that `EffectiveCost` and `PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost` are consistent.

### Suggestion: the second sentence may be redundant and could be removed.

- I would suggest keeping the requirement simple and removing the second sentence (`All normative requirements that apply to EffectiveCost apply equivalently...`). If needed, it could be addressed in the intro section in a future PR.

**Note:**
- Following the DRY principle: `PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost` contains a requirement defining its alignment with `EffectiveCost`, and `EffectiveCost` contains requirements addressing its relationship with `BilledCost`.
- Additional context can be provided in the intro section where needed rather than duplicating normative requirements across columns.
- This is also mentioned in the **Normative Requirements Guidelines** (see PR #1967, [1.9. DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself) Principle](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/blob/1059-attribute-normative-guidelines/guidelines/contributors/normative-requirements-guidelines.md#19-dry-dont-repeat-yourself-principle) section).

Author: Irena's suggestion is already applied. The anchoring requirement is sufficient without inheriting the sum checks. Resolving.
